Sorry for the wall of text.

Currently ring is defined basically as a list of members. A member is
described with an ID, an incarnation, an address and ports (1) and
other data. If a supervisor receives a message with that list, it
knows how to talk to other supervisors in the ring. A member contains
information about a supervisor, so they are used interchangeably in
the following text.

Currently I'd like to add another thing that will be a part of a ring
definition - zones. Zone is a part of a ring. It does not overlap with
other zones. In other words - zone can contain many supervisors, but
one supervisor belongs to only one zone. Zone is meant to describe the
network of supervisors that can easily talk to each other, that is -
all the supervisor in a zone needs to talk to other supervisor in the
same zone is just its IP address and port. The communication between
supervisors in different zones might be a bit more involved, which is
true when we want to talk with a service behind a NAT. An example of
it could be a supervisor outside a k8s cluster that wants to talk to
the supervisor inside the cluster.

So the definition of the rings would be a list of members and a tree
of zones (2). The parent-child relationship in the tree describes how
supervisor in one zone can communicate with supervisor on other
node. Taking the k8s cluster example from above, the supervisors
inside the cluster would be in a child zone of a zone that contains
supervisors outside the cluster. So supervisors in child zone can
easily talk to the supervisors in parent zone, but the opposite it's
not true.

A subset of supervisors in zone can act as gateways - these are the
supervisors that are exposed over the NAT boundary and these are the
supervisors to whom supervisors in parent zone can talk to in order to
get a message routed to some other supervisor that is not exposed.

So a zone could be described with an ID (UUID, just like a member), an
incarnation, an ID of a parent zone (possibly nil; could be a list of
IDs, if the structure would be a directed acyclic graph instead of a
tree), a list of IDs of child zones and a list of IDs of members which
serve as gateways. (3)

When a supervisor starts, it has a nil zone ID. When it does not have
any peers to talk to, it will settle the zone ID before replying to
the first supervisor that talks to it, so the reply can possibly
contain a settled zone ID. By settling the zone ID I mean here
generating a new ID if it is nil.

In case of supervisor that just started and has a list of peers to
talk to to join the ring, it assumes that its zone ID will be the one
in the first reply it gets, unless the reply tells it not to do that -
in this case it will settle its zone ID.

The case when the supervisor receives a reply with a "do not take my
zone ID as yours" happens when the supervisor pinged the other one
behind a NAT. But how can the supervisor behind the NAT know that it
is about to send a reply to the supervisor on the other side of NAT
boundary? Adding a "To" field being an address and a port to the Ping
message could solve this issue, because the supervisor could compare
the internal address and port it already knows and the address from
the "To" field. If they are different then it very likely means that
the supervisor sending the Ping message should belong to a different
zone.

There may be a situation where a supervisor joins two separate rings,
so they should become one ring with one zone - at this moment, zone
merging should start. I suppose this could be done with a new kind of
rumor…

Also, the "To" field from the Ping message can serve as a way for the
supervisor to learn that it is really exposed outside the NAT, so the
supervisor becomes a gateway.

I think that the member description should be extended with
information about zone it belongs to and with a list of extra
addresses the member is available from.

The new member information and the new zones information could be used
to define the route between two supervisors in two different zones. I
can see four basic scenarios where supervisor in zone A sends a
message to supervisor in zone B:

1. Zone A is a parent of zone B - message could be sent to random
gateway of zone B. The gateway will take care of forwarding it
further.

2. Zone A is a child of zone B - message could be sent directly, I
think, skipping the gateways.

3. Zone A is a sibling of zone B - message could be sent to random
gateway of zone B, so we don't need to involve any supervisor in
parent zone in message forwarding. This could be seen as a kind of
optimization, probably.

4. Zone A is the same as zone B - message could be sent directly.

Any complex route will be a list of those basic scenarios.

Probably the fastest way to do the forwarding would be to add another
kind of message (like ForwardedMessage) which could contain the
payload (which is either a SWIM or a gossip message), an ID of a
member that this message should go to and some TTL field. The
ForwardedMessage message could be the payload of a Wire message.

The recipient of the ForwardedMessage message could check if the
member ID is the same as its own. If it's true, it could process
it. Otherwise it could compute a route and forward the message to the
first supervisor on the route. I suppose that if the supervisor
doesn't have enough information about how to forward the message, it
could decrement the TTL and send it to random supervisor in the same
zone.

I haven't thought too much over the backward-compatibility, though. I
think that maybe it could be possible to detect that we are trying to
talk over NAT boundary to the supervisor that runs some old,
NAT-unaware version, and bail out or ignore or warn about it.

1. Can we safely assume that swim port and gossip port will always
have the same number? In butterfly it is possible for them to be
different, but this is not utilized by the supervisor - it uses the
same number for both. If they can be different in Real Life, it would
complicate the design, because a supervisor could not quickly discover
which port for gossip communication is being exposed after receiving a
Ping message over the exposed swim port.

2. A tree or a directed acyclic graph? Probably does not matter much
anyway.

3. The zone tree (or a graph) needs to be maintained somehow. Each
supervisor is responsible for maintaining its member information and
spreading information about the changes there. Who should be
responsible for maintaining the zone information? Yet another leader
chosen through election?

Edited:

- added missing information about incarnation
- added more information about routing




Draft: establishing ring with zones

A <-- B - B tries to join the ring by talking to A
A <-/- B - same, but over the NAT boundary, from outside to inside
TODO: come up with a notation for communication over NAT boundary, but from inside to outside
A --- B - A and B form a ring
A -/- B - same, but over the NAT boundary
A(ZA) - A is in zone ZA
A(*ZA) - A is a maintainer of zone ZA



A <-- B

- B sends ping to A
  - no zone information in ping message
- A settles its zone (ZA)
  - generate a uuid for ZA
  - set itself as a maintainer of ZA
  - add ZA to its zone information
- A sends an Ack message with from_address and from_swim_port set to
  to_address and to_swim_port in Ping message
  - the message should contain information about the zone
- B sees that A's address is the same as in from_address and from_port
  and overrides its zone with ZA.

A(*ZA) --- B(ZA)



A(*ZA) --- B(ZA) <-- C

- C sends ping to B
- B sends an Ack message with from_address and from_swim_port set to
  to_address and to_swim_port in Ping message
- C sees that B's address is the same as in from_address and from_port
  and overrides its zone with ZA.

A(*ZA) --- B(ZA) --- C(ZA)



A(*ZA) --- B(ZA) <--\
C(*ZC) --- D(ZC) <----- E

- E sends ping to B
- E sends ping to D
- B sends an Ack message as usual
- D sends an Ack message as usual
- E gets a reply from B first (just an assumption)
- E settles its zone to ZA
- E gets a reply from D, with a different zone.
- E notices that the from_address and from_port in the reply are the
  same as the internal IP of D, so all this should be the same zone.
- Which zone disappears is decided by comparing the ids. Say, the one
  with the greater ID stays. Let's assume that ZA is decided to stay,
  ZC should be merged into ZA.
- E probably needs to sends a new SWIM message (zone merge?) to the
  maintainer of ZC with information about ZA, that should be used.
- C (the maintainer of ZC sends a rumor limited to ZC members to
  change the zone to ZA)

A(*ZA) --- B(ZA) ---\
C(ZA) --- D(ZA) ------ E(ZA)



A <-/- B

- B sends ping to A
- A settles its zone (ZA)
- A notices that to_address and to_port in Ping are different than the
  internal ones, so it puts them into the temporary AddressForZone
  (contains nul zone uuid and a new address and port)
- A sends an Ack message to B with from_address and from_port same as
  to_address and to_port in Ping.
- B receives the Ack message from A and notices that from_address and
  from_port are different from A's internal address and port. So it
  settles on its own zone (ZB) and sends an Ack message to A with an
  updated zone information.
- A receives an Ack message from B, updates the AddressForZone that
  matches from_address and from_port in the Ack message with the new
  zone information, if zone id is nul.

A(*ZA) -/- B(*ZB)



A(*ZA) -/- B(*ZB)
     ^
      \-/- C

- same steps as above

A(*ZA) -/- B(*ZB)
     |
      \-/- C(*ZC)

- Eventually B learns about C and sends it a direct ping to C's internal address
- ???



TODO:

Zone should be loadable from file after supervisor restart (just like
member is).

I ignored PingReq messages so far.

Think more about the establishing the zones when talking over the
boundary, especially when the initiator comes from inside the NAT. I
think this will be possible only when we explicitly tell the
supervisor inside the NAT about its exposed address, so the supervisor
can fill the extra address info before sending the Ping message. This
is for the supervisor that receives the Ping message, so it won't try
to start merging the zones.

Explain all the additions to the swim.proto file, so I don't have to
recall everytime why I added that. Also, review some of them - maybe
sometimes sending a uuid instead of full information could be enough.
